# Sneaker Culture
#### December 3, 2015–February 28, 2016
### by Ana Nezna

For as long as I’ve know myself, I’ve know my sneakers. The choices I
made or that were made for me throughout the span of childhood,
adolescent and adult life have formed my sense of self. My first memory
of the beloved sneaker was around the age of five. My brother, older by
two years, had learned of Michael Jordan and coveted that first pair of
Air Jordan’s. As freshly arrived immigrants in the early 80’s, my mother
could by no means afford those fresh red, black, and white high-top gym
shoes. Fortunately, she was a savvy shopper at Zayre or K-mart, and
located a look-alike knock-off for both of us. They were our first
high-tops, and they were a pain to put on and take off, but all the
same, they were our “Jordan’s” and we treasured them.

After that first taste of sneaker comfort and ease, I chose my own pairs
at the local Fayva; I rode a white and pink pair of Pony’s through the
ages of seven and eight. After that, L.A. Gear hit the scene and I had
to have those ultra-girly yet super-sporty kicks. After those initial
fake Jordan’s, my brother and I never wore the same shoes again, he grew
into a tried and true Nike devotee while I wavered from Pony to Reebok,
eventually settling on Nike during my pre-teen angst.

Sneakers were a way that kids defined themselves at public schools in
Chicago, they could make you or break you. Being a tomboyish
twelve-year-old, I chose the most masculine looking Nike mid-tops in my
size. They may have even been boy’s shoes. Those gym shoes made me feel
strong at a time when everything was changing, they offered me a sense
of stability and allowed me to remain a child, free of the crushes on
boys that so many of my friends were facing. I was in no hurry to grow
up, in fact I hated the whole process, and those shoes were my
protection. At my K-8 school on the northwest side, everyone fit in at
that age, girls who wore makeup and liked boys and those who wore
sneakers and still played on the monkey bars.

When my friend, DJ Moppy, with whom I had been staying while in Detroit
to view the *D.Fined* exhibit, mentioned that he was invited to perform
in January with fellow Detroiters, guitarist Ryan Gimpert and MC Josef
Coney Island for for the museum’s bash as part of *The Rise of Sneaker
Culture* exhibit at the Toledo Museum of Art, I looked down at my
current sneakers of choice, hi-top purple suede Puma’s and thought,
‘Toledo is on my way to Kent!’.

In a *Fashion Theory Journal* article from 2008, “Museum Quality: The
Rise of the Fashion Exhibition”, editor-in-chief Valerie Steele notes
that a fashion exhibition at a museum can produce some hostility,
highlighting the low status of fashion within academia, conjuring
disagreements between curators and academics, and presenting conflicts
about the role of museums and about fashion as an aspect of popular
culture. The popularity of sneakers and their role as a mark of
distinction among urban youths, like my twelve-year-old self, make them
an interesting endeavor for an art museum. The welcoming museum tableau
offered this question for the visitor to consider: “How is it that at a
single glance, a pair of sneakers can reveal nuanced social
information?” The query made me reflect on my adolescent choice to wear
a non-gendered sneaker.

In the conclusion to her article, Steele remarks, “some exhibitions may
even be like poems or films, evocative and inspiring even when they are
not entirely understood. After all, one of the core constituencies for
fashion exhibitions embraces those individuals for whom fashion is a
creative field.” While *The Rise of Sneaker Culture* takes a partial
chronological approach, it marks these transitions with six distinct
numbered themes: Innovation, Rubber Revolution, The Body Politic,
Fashioning Fitness, Sneakers in a Global Society, and Fresh. Neither a
poem nor a film, the exhibit is more like a novel, composed of six
chapters to tell the story of the sneaker.

Some of my favorite chapters were Chapter 3: The Body Politic, Chapter
5: Sneakers in a Global Society, and Chapter 6: Fresh. The Body Politic
addressed the proliferation of sneakers from about post-World War I to
the post-World War II baby boom. The museum text panel says that it was
in this period that sneakers emerged as one of the most democratic forms
of footwear. As people and nations strove for physical fitness, the
sneaker’s popularity grew. It was also in this period that two of my
favorite brands arose in Germany, Adidas and Puma. By far, the best pair
at the exhibit were the Adidas Allround from 1960, merging my love of
mid-tops with bright colors and thin soles, in the style of a wrestling
shoe.

In Chapter 5: Sneakers in a Global Society, the nostalgic effect hit me
hard. There were my first Jordans, albeit the “real” version, the Adidas
Superstars that I wore for my sweet sixteen year, and clips of Run-DMC,
talking about their song “My Adidas”. Finally, Chapter 6: Fresh was by
far the most varied in stylings as there were many collaborations of
artist and shoe. Most notably, Puma and Kehinde Wiley’s collaboration in
2010 for the Tekkies Mame shoe, with embroidered gold colored fabric,
and Puma and Hussein Chalayan’s Urban Swift 2011, where Chalayan’s spiky
design makes the shoe look as if the leather is flying off it, from the
speed or the wind. And Brooklyn-based artist, Shantell Martin made her
own fly brand with customized de-branded high-top from 2012. Puma?
Adidas? Nike? Reebok? Who cares!

*The Rise of Sneaker Culture* included all necessary elements of a
successful exhibit; visual and aesthetic aspects, historical accuracy,
and an interpretation of the concepts presented. Thanks to the Bata Shoe
Museum in Toronto, who organized and curated the exhibit, along with the
help of the American Federation of Arts, sneakers went from street chic
to discrete feet at the Toledo Museum of Art.
