### By Ana Sekler

Where do young fashion designers in Chicago go after they’ve received
their degrees? Many leave the city for brighter prospects on one of the
coasts or in Europe. Those that choose to stay and are lucky enough go
to Macy’s, of course. To the eleventh floor that is, where the Chicago
Fashion Incubator (CFI), a two-year fashion residency program for
emerging designers resides.

Although this may come as a surprise to some, Chicago has a history of
garment manufacturing, primarily during and slightly after World War II.
The city is still home to high-quality men’s suit makers: Hart Schaffner
Marx and Oxxford clothes. That history was somehow forgotten, until
former Mayor Daley began the city’s fashion initiative in 2005. CFI and
Fashion Focus Chicago were two of the products of this endeavor. While
Fashion Focus, a week of fashion shows and talks about the fashion
industry has been sadly defunct since 2015, the CFI still appears to be
going strong.

“When Mayor Daley started the incubator back in 2007, he had hoped to
bring up more manufacturing, make it alive again, make it a center,
providing more jobs for people and making it a potential place for
designers to stay longer here or to really create their businesses,”
says Andrea Reynders, Design Director of CFI. Reynders who is also
Professor Emeritus at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, where
she earned her BFA, began working on the board of the Chicago Fashion
Incubator when former student, Lara Miller, then executive director of
CFI, asked her to join in 2010. When Miller left to focus on her own
clothing line, Reynders took over as Design Director and mentor in 2014.
The board also hired Trideep Das, a brand strategist, as Business
Director at that time.

The incubator provides six fledgling designers with the resources to
bridge the gap from fashion students to fashion entrepreneurs. CFI
supports the designers by offering them a workspace, shared offices, and
a curriculum of business and creative workshops, and mentoring. “Coming
from a strong art and design background, there was virtually no business
knowledge, so understanding my consumer, how to do a competitor’s grid,
understanding the ins and outs of that, I’m learning all that” says
Shruti Kirti, who is now in her second year at the incubator. Like
Kirti, Anna Brown, another CFI second-year designer, agrees that the
incubator has helped her to professionalize her practice while offering
crucial creative and business support.

The designers have varied focuses: four in womenswear, one in menswear,
and one in swimwear. Each develops two collections during their time at
the incubator. Kirti, who was a student of Reynder’s at SAIC, began the
program in March 2015, and was working on her fall/winter 2016
collection when I first met with her in November. Her clothing line
concentrates on career wear with functionality. “Your clothes really
have to carry you through the day, so I’m working with a specific fabric
that’s referred to as scuba, it doesn’t wrinkle or stretch easily but is
comfortable and soft, and it adds a little funkiness to career wear,”
says Kirti.

Their collections are as varied as their goals at CFI. Whereas Kirti is
focused on selling her collection direct to consumer, Brown is moving
towards selling her collection to boutiques. “Coming here, my goal was
to move into selling wholesale to boutiques as I was having trouble
reaching my customer, I wasn’t able to market myself properly, so I
thought to give the wholesale route a shot,” says Brown.

Brown makes clothing for someone who is looking for more creativity in
their wardrobe. “I try to make a more nuanced modern collection, I’m
sort of a minimalist and I guess a little bit of a modernist in terms of
my approach to design as I try only to include what is essential in
terms of structure to the garment,” she says. Brown is interested in
creating contemporary staples for a women’s wardrobe, clothes that
retain an ease of use, but that also define the body, and have
structural interest and functional yet refreshing details like pockets.

Midwestern cities like Chicago often have a hard time of keeping their
designers, not due to the lack of creative energy but to the lack of
manufacturing. “The lack of manufacturing here is a problem for all of
us, it makes it difficult,” says Brown. Recalling the early strength of
the Apparel Industry Board of Illinois (AIBI) in the 1970s, Reynders
says, “that organization was very powerful at some point, and they even
built what was the garment center, right next door to the Merchandise
Mart. Their dream was to bring buyers to Chicago, and it worked for a
couple of years, because people were curious and interested. The point
was to build up Chicago, but it was a big struggle, and I believe
primarily due to the manufacturing, couldn’t start the fire under it, it
would always smolder out.”

Today, with organizations like CFI, Chicago is working not only to
educate but also to retain its local designers, like Kirti, who says “I
want to grow this business here and use local resources. Midwestern is a
compliment to me, that’s what I want it to be.” So far, Kirti has been
successful, her fabric is sourced locally, and she has been able to
locate a seamstress and photographer in Chicago, with the help of the
incubator resources.

Being outside of a centralized fashion capital has advantages for
emerging designers. “The Chicago market isn’t over-saturated and we get
to experiment and explore who we are as designers,” says Kirti. CFI
supports its designers in various ways, with one-on-one mentoring, trunk
shows, and practical business advice. “I tend to think of the Midwest as
meat and potatoes, it’s serious about its work, we’re not flamboyant,”
says Reynders. The incubator designers are always at work, whether
cutting fabric for their patterns, organizing photo shoots, or traveling
to boutiques to show their current collections. “I’ve taken everything
up a level here, and I wouldn’t be able to do this on my own,” says
Brown of her time at CFI.

The life of a CFI fashion designer isn’t only about dress forms, fabric,
and designs; a lot of footwork is involved. “Many of the designers in
general get on the road, either they pack and fly to a city, make
appointments with boutique owners, show their collections, sometimes
there’s a trunk show involved,” explains Reynders. When I met with Anna
Brown in February, she had just returned from a short trip to New York,
scouting boutiques that may be potential buyers for her collection, and
was busy starting on her spring/summer 2017 collection.

“I really think there’s something amazing that’s going to happen in
fashion, there’s going to be a huge change and I feel it already. There
are many small, independent designers in New York, California, Chicago,
St. Louis who are making a really good product, trying to make it
locally, or at least nationally,” says Reynders. Bridget Foley’s article
from October, in *Women’s Wear Daily* echoes Reynder’s sentiment. “It
feels as if fashion is on one giant collision course with itself and
everyone’s talking about it, designers included. While no one wants to
turn back the clock (not possible, and reactionary doesn’t fly in
fashion), many wonder—out loud—how to evolve (or perhaps revolutionize)
the system in a way that makes sense,” says Foley in her article
“Fashion’s Existential Crisis”.

The responsibility is not only to the designer but perhaps even more so
the consumer. Shruti Kirti laughs as she relates that she herself does
not shop much, and advises the fast-fashion, trend-hungry consumer, to
simply “shop less!” This may be the key formula to creating a healthier
relationship to fashion: shop less, and analyze more in order to develop
personal style, while hopefully supporting our local clothes makers.
