## *Flapper Style: 1920s Fashion:* <h4>September 25, 2015&ndash;September 4, 2016</h4>
## *Inside Out: Revealing Clothing’s Hidden Secrets:* <h4>March 12, 2015&ndash;July 31, 2016</h4>
## *Fashion Timeline:* <h4>June 29, 2012&ndash;June 24, 2018</h4>

### by Ana Sekler

Museums devoted to fashion are few and far between in the U.S.,
especially in the Midwest. The Costume Institute at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art and The Museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology,
both in New York are the most esteemed and oldest. While Chicago
colleges like Columbia College and the School of the Art Institute offer
fashion study collections and resource centers, they do not present
regular exhibits of interest to the general public. The Kent State
University Museum (KSUM) however is a hidden treasure trove of
fashionable delights at the easternmost limits of the Midwest, in Kent,
Ohio.

KSUM has been exhibiting, collecting, presenting and preserving fashion
and decorative arts since 1985. Now numbering over 20,000 objects, the
collection began in 1982 with generous gifts by Shannon Rodgers, a
native Ohioan fashion designer al and Jerry Silverman, a New York
businessman. The two were partners in Jerry Silverman Inc., one of the
most successful ready-to-wear firms in the latter half of the 20^th^
century on New York’s famous Seventh Avenue. The collection of costume,
decorative arts, and books, worth around five million dollars was
donated to Kent State University, which in turn agreed to build a museum
to house the artifacts. In addition to the collection from Rodgers and
Silverman, KSUM received Oscar de la Renta’s 1982 collection as well a
700-piece collection of performance costumes from Katharine Hepburn.
Both of those collections have been exhibited at various times
throughout the museum’s history. Some of the garments from the Oscar de
la Renta collection are currently on loan to San Francisco’s de Young
Museum for their retrospective exhibit on the designer, explains Sara
Hume, curator at KSUM. Current exhibits at KSUM include *Fashion
Timeline*, *Inside Out: Revealing Clothing’s Hidden Secrets*, and
*Flapper Style: 1920s Fashion,* all carefully curated by Hume.

On the first floor of the museum is the *Fashion Timeline* exhibit,
which showcases fashion history from 1750–1950, a grand feat that never
feels overwhelming. The garments are clearly marked following a timeline
on the wall that also presents important moments in history, in order to
contextualize the style of the garments and show the evolution. For
example, the development of the sewing machine in 1845 by Elias Howe
marks the end of the section devoted to the first half of the 1800s and
signals the beginning of the democratization of fashion in the second
half of the century. The movement to machine-made garments coincided
with the birth of the department store in the latter half of the 19^th^
century. While ready-to-wear garments were readily adopted for men, the
late 1800s also saw the birth of haute-couture in Charles Frederick
Worth’s dress designs in Paris.

A stark, plain day suit in wool welcomes the visitor to the 20^th^
century, a marked contrast that coincides with the establishment of the
Bauhaus in 1918 and the women’s right to vote in 1920. This move towards
less ornament in women’s fashion echoes the sentiment of Adolf Loos,
Austrian architect, theorist, and author of *Ornament and Crime*. In his
essay “Ladies’ Fashion (1898/1902)”, Loos ends with, “but we are heading
toward a newer, greater age. Women will no longer have to appeal to
sensuality to achieve equal status with men, but will do so through
their economic and intellectual independence, gained through work. …
Silks and satins, ribbons and bows, frills and furbelows will lose their
effectiveness.” Corsets and petticoats are altogether abandoned after
World War I. The exhibit ends with the 1930s–50s, with loose matching
cotton dresses for mother and daughter from 1940, echoing Loos’ s
prediction forty years earlier.

Although the *Fashion Timeline* exhibit is historically accurate and
varied, it is contained in fairly small gallery space and does not
prepare one for the pizazz on the second floor in the Broadbent Gallery,
for *Flapper Style*. Early on a Wednesday morning, the gallery was
empty, allowing for space, light, and awe. My jaw dropped when I
entered, the rows of stunningly dressed mannequins, with a mirror behind
them that for the first few minutes tricked me into believing there was
a multitude more hidden in another room. As with *Fashion Timeline*,
curator Sara Hume looks beyond the garments to the social and political
environment that shaped them. “I’m a historian, so I’m interested in the
social aspect, like with the Flapper exhibit, which examines the changes
in women’s lives and how that was reflected in the garments,” says Hume.
Not swayed by Diana Vreeland’s belief that the fashion exhibit must be
entertaining above all, Hume is just as concerned with historical
accuracy and educational role that an exhibit plays.

Hume contextualizes each moment in history for the visitor. The flapper
is described as bold and independent; “this flapper has forgotten how to
simper; she seldom blushes; it is impossible to shock her.” The dresses
on view in front of this particular text personify it, the copper and
gold beaded headdresses must have created sounds to accompany the jazz
music and the flapper’s movements. The loose silhouettes defied earlier
rules of strict corsetry and redefined women’s fashion. The flapper was
elegant and rebellious. She didn’t whimper and neither do her dresses,
they cheer and celebrate.

Not only smart and sophisticated, 1920s fashion exhibited early
characteristics of sportswear. As attention to physical fitness
increased (and the sneaker rose to prominence) casual wear became more
acceptable. Two of my favorite outfits in the exhibit were in fact not
proper garments but gym suits, one a wool gym uniform, consisting of a
black wool jumper with a white shirt underneath from the Kent State
Normal School, and the other black bloomers with a white day shirt.
Perhaps because they were the beginnings of sportswear, and I had just
come from viewing the *Sneaker Culture* exhibit in Toledo, or maybe
because of that all-American comfort that I value so much, these gym
suits resonated with the current sportswear aesthetic.

Engaging with garments as art objects in a museum setting changes them
in some way. Whether historical garments as in these current exhibits at
KSUM, or contemporary designs, like those curated by Diana Vreeland or
Richard Martin and Harold Koda, the question “is fashion art?” will
continue to be asked. To this, I can only offer a quote from Barthes in
“The Contest between Chanel and Courrèges. Refereed by a Philosopher”,
where he says, “we have to believe that society needs this contest,
because society has been ingenious at launching it—at least for the last
few centuries—in all domains of art, and in an infinite variety of
forms; and if we now see it clearly breaking into fashion, it is because
fashion too is also an art, in the same way as literature, painting and
music are.”

The third fashion exhibit on view at the KSUM was *Inside Out: Revealing
Clothing’s Hidden Secrets,* in which the garments on view were shown
from the inside out, revealing the secret inner-workings that usually go
unseen. The garments chosen, all remarkably intact, span the 18^th^ to
20^th^ centuries. While my sewing skills haven’t progressed beyond
hemming, this exhibit would surely be a delight for those who do
understand the craft as close inspection of some of the garments shows
where they have been altered. An examination of the lining of the Robe à
l’anglaise from the 1770s shows places where seams were taken out. Loose
stitching was typical of this period, as dresses were often updated and
modified as styles changed.

The most interesting garment to view from the inside out for me was a
pair of men’s breeches from the 1780s. I finally learned how those
dapper gentlemen would remove their breeches, or at least how they could
relieve themselves, via front flap that buttoned on. The rear of the
breeches was also quite amusing as it consisted of a fullness of
material, perhaps intended to allow for an ease in movement. Hume
suggests that the fullness may have been due to the long shirts that men
wore, so the space in the breeches would allow for the shirt to be
tucked in properly. The numerous flaps and panels on the breeches form
three pockets on each side, although they don’t appear bulky by any
means. “*Inside Out* takes a different look, it’s showing how the
garments are made and put together, showing aspects that you don’t get
to see, and that’s a different way of thinking about fashion as an
object, as a craft, as a product, versus thinking about it as an
aesthetic,” says Hume.

The Kent State University Museum has some odds against it, being
situated outside of a large metropole, in a small college-town creates a
struggle for the institution. What it lacks in a centralized location,
it makes up for in the scale and quality and approach of its
exhibitions. “Looking at fashion as an aesthetic is certainly an
approach, but it can also be looked at as a garment that links to
history, that was owned by someone, and had some relation to their
life,” says Hume. Perhaps, it is KSUM’s unique location that allows for
its particular approach in exhibiting fashion and garments as more than
just art objects, but as a history, a skill, and a cultural gesture.
