# Finding Order Within Fashion’s Disorder
### By Ana Sekler

As much as the fashion industry presents itself as in a state of
constant flux, always innovating and offering a different product, it
can be liberating to think of fashion as existing within a system.
Roland Barthes, the French literary theorist, linguist and philosopher,
introduced a linguistic order within fashion in his 1967 book, *The
Fashion System*.

Through Barthes’ semiotic analysis of clothing as written language,
based on consulting issues of *Elle* and *Le Jardin des Modes* from June
1958–59, he argues that clothing shares with language the objective of
communication. Barthes summarized his endeavor best in an interview with
*France-Forum* in 1967:

“My book is an itinerary, a patient, almost meticulous voyage
accomplished by an ingenuous man who tries to see how meaning is
constructed, how men construct it—in this case, how fashionable clothing
is made meaningful: thus, the book becomes a voyage of discovery, a
topical itinerary of meaning. And yet this itinerary is presented not as
a personal voyage but as a grammar, a description of levels of meaning,
of units and their combinatory rules, in short, as a kind of syntax of
description. The book will be justified if, being itself a composed
object, it manages to evoke before the reader’s eyes, in a kind of
homologous fashion, a new object which is clothing in the written mode.”

While many of the chapters in *The Fashion System* address this
application of structural linguistics to dress, I will focus on only one
idea; that of rhythm within fashion. I found it most relevant to my
current thought, the first “R” in this issue; that of reduce. The notion
of a rhythm in fashion is introduced by Barthes when he touches upon the
work of American cultural anthropologist, A.L. Kroeber, father of famed
writer, Ursula K. Le Guin. Kroeber examined the principles that guided
fashion from 1894–1919. The main premise of his work can be summed up by
the following: “the rhythm of fashion change is not only regular (the
amplitude is about a half century, complete oscillation takes a century)
but tends to alternate forms according to a rational order; for example,
the breadth of a skirt and that of the waistline are always in inverse
relations: when one is narrow, the other is wide. In short, on a time
scale of adequate duration, fashion is an orderly phenomenon, and this
order comes from within fashion itself.”

According to Barthes, if this rhythm continues to be regular, then skirt
length will lengthen from 1967 on and at about 2020 or 2025, skirts
should be long again. I found this information fascinating as I do see
evidence to corroborate. The midi-length skirt has been a recent hit as
far as length and maxi dresses continue to dominate much of the summer
wardrobe offerings in 2016, so it seems reasonable to postulate that
long skirts will be all the rage in four years. Fashion is too often
thought of in the span of a few years, but if the range of perception is
broadened to thirty or forty years, then seeing a historical continuity
is possible.

With each new season, designers are marketing the novel, the fresh and
singular items that weren’t there the season before. It becomes even
more complicated when today’s fashion introduces not two seasons a year,
but eight or even 52 “micro-seasons”. How can fashions change so
quickly? The careful observer will note that they do not in fact change
as the industry would lead us to believe.

One of the juiciest attractions to a television series like Downton
Abbey set between 1912–25, is not only the twisting plot lines and
character development, but the fashions of a century ago. Contemporary
designers took a cue and the 2012 lines of Gucci, Ralph Lauren, and Anna
Sui evoked the rollicking twenties. The bob haircut was one of the most
popular cuts of 2015, another throwback to the previous century.

Examples of the cyclical nature of fashion are to be found everywhere.
The disco-ball has landed in all its metallic glory of fringe,
jumpsuits, and high-waists; the 70s returned with a roar in 2014, after
over thirty years. The sixties influence can be evidenced in Miu Miu’s
most recent collections, patent leather and patterns galore in bright
baby-blues, sunshine yellows and Kelly greens. The eighties influence is
already being seen, in oversized denim jackets, mirrored sunglasses, and
the cuffed jean.

Fashion’s changes are not always easily reducible to a system as it’s
language was for Barthes, but it is important to be aware of the
regularity of trends so as not to fall prey to them each time they are
marketed as “must-have” or “season’s hottest”. There are plenty of
fashion designers who are testing the boundaries of fashion with their
cutting-edge designs and truly offering a new idea. I’m reminded of
Japanese designers, Anrealage who used photosensitive fabrics in their
fall 2015 collection, which changed color when hit by spotlights on the
runway, and Belgian fashion designer Iris van Herpen who has been
working with 3D printing in her collections. Or on the other end of the
spectrum, designers, like local designer Leigh DeLeonardo, who offer
quality-made classic garments that go beyond trend.\
Although there are limits to Barthes’ linguistic model, as evidenced in
Michael Carter’s 2012 article, “Stuff and Nonsense: The Limits of the
Linguistic Model of Clothing.” We rely on this linguistic model we can
ignore other discoveries. “Dress consists of material forms and is not
just a notice board upon which are attached two-dimensional signs.
Allowing for the profound conceptual transformations of clothing brought
about by Barthes it is still not possible to wholly subsume clothing
beneath the banner of communication,” writes Carter.

Barthes’ writing on fashion appeals to me because of its organization of
a seemingly chaotic aspect of the everyday into a manageable structure.
For me, clothing is more approachable and manageable when I set limits,
work within an imaginary system even. For example, if I only seek out
patterns when shopping then the experience becomes less overwhelming
than having no idea of what I want, which is a limit in itself. With no
idea of what is wanted, surprises or extreme frustration can ensue.
Following fashion’s trends is a fruitless and consuming labor,
establishing one’s personal style however is timeless and rewarding.
Yves Saint Laurent’s famous phrase comes to mind, “Fashions fade, style
is eternal.”
