# Georg Simmel and the Passion for Fashion
### By Ana Nezna

Fashion is not a passion, it is however passing. One of the fundamental
elements of its survival is its transitory nature, the speed at which it
aims to trick and lure us unaware into its web of consumption. However,
more and more today, consumers are growing aware of their actions having
consequences: on the planet, on other humans, and on themselves as well.

The concept of slow fashion came into being thanks to the slow food
movement, which began in Italy about twenty years ago. Slow Food began
as a mechanism of retaining the joy of cooking and eating; working to
reconnect people to one another, their communities, and the larger
world. Slow fashion began in much the same way, around twelve years ago
as a response to the grave problems facing the garment industry; from
factory disasters, like the Rana Plaza collapse in Dhaka, Bangladesh in
2013 that killed a reported 1,129 workers to the exploitation of natural
resources. Elizabeth L. Cline does a thorough job of describing many of
these abuses and solutions in her 2012 book, *Overdressed.* I will take
one of the solutions she suggests that I find most reasonable and
effective, that of the strength of the consumer’s choice.

Over a century ago in 1901, Georg Simmel, the German sociologist, wrote
an essay, titled “Fashion.” While the language denoting a primitive
society needs to be adjusted for today’s intellectual context, the work
still resonates in 2016 and can be linked back to ideals set forth in
the slow fashion movement. “Fashion is the imitation of a given example
and satisfies the demand for social adaptation; it leads the individual
upon the road which all travel, it furnishes a general condition, which
resolves the conduct of every individual into a mere example. At the
same time it satisfies in no less degree the need of differentiation,
the tendency towards dissimilarity, the desire for change and contrast,
on the one hand by a constant change of contents, which gives to the
fashion of today an individual stamp as opposed to that of yesterday and
of tomorrow, on the other hand because fashions differ for different
classes—the fashions of the upper stratum of society are never identical
with those of the lower; in fact, they are abandoned by the former as
soon as the latter prepares to appropriate them. Thus fashion represents
nothing more than one of the many form of life by the aid of which we
seek to combine in uniform spheres of activity the tendency towards
social equalization with the desire for individual differentiation and
change.” There is the crux of Simmel’s argument, and from there begins
the challenge of the contemporary consumer of clothing as an aspect of
fashion. While the excerpt contains a hefty amount of information which
I may not be able to address all aspects of, so let’s start slowly.

Simmel’s idea that fashion gives a particular crest to its age, to
differ it from yesterday and tomorrow, kind of like the gold colored
seals found on navy men’s blazers. What has ended up happening in much
of the mainstream fashion is a perpetual yesterday, and some future on
rare moments tossed in. This endless search for trend is what is in fact
destroying the fashionistae, the plural of fashionista I propose. On
this madcap route to trend, quality and endurance have been forgotten.

The dignity of a garment lies not in its novelty but in its fortitude.
That being said, the fast fashion giants of H&M, Zara, Forever 21,
Uniqlo, The Gap, have a hold on buy three, get one for free. Who needs
four of the same t-shirt, shirt, skirt? Apparently, all of us do, I have
plenty of similar garments, primarily in the tops realm, they’re all
cotton in either long or short sleeves. However, there are several that
stand out, from memory, a brown and black striped cotton top from Sonia
Rykiel whose elbow I’ve patched once, a blue and white thin striped
cotton top with a by now stretched out neck that adds a nice amount of
allure, from the ‘label fell off I can’t remember’, and a pink
button-down shirt with little red mice chasing dispersed pieces of
cheese all over it from Anthropologie. I’ve had these three tops, for
varying lengths of time, but all from five to seven years old, more than
a season, and I think they will last another five to seven year,
primarily because I care for them and mend them. I can record them all
three from memory, not from digital memories, but of the ones that
actually use the space in my brain, so they are special to me.

The second idea of Simmel’s that I’d like to address is the one about
class differences in fashion, the upper echelon differentiates from the
the lower, and in addition that fashions are abandoned by the upper
strata if they become appropriated by the lower. It is at first glance
quite easily true and a myriad of examples can be given to prove the
point. I however find it much more stimulating to think of the
appropriation of the lower division’s fashion that is occurring by the
upper level, the styles come from the street and they always have.

Walking on the street creates fashion, why is sportswear so popular now?
No surprise, regular folks have been wearing sportswear stylishly for
decades. Binaries of class aren’t necessary however, the simple
acknowledgement of upper and lower strata taking, borrowing, and
sometimes stealing from one another are cyclical. It is interesting to
note that designers like Vêtements are profiting on the working man’s
culture of DHL t-shirts for \$330. Henry Ford, he increased the worker’s
salary so that they could afford to buy a Ford automobile, I wonder if
the same is true of Vetements garment makers? While I am simply
remarking as to the mediocrity of the design. The word itself in French
simply means clothes, which is a cheeky name for a clothing label, but
does it have more than cheek? is there a functioning brain atop the
cheeks, I wonder.

Fashion, according to Simmel is fickle in the sense that while it
promotes an attachment to a larger group, it also deters from uniformity
towards individual differentiation. Even in striving to be an individual
though we echo the sentiment of those that desire to be alike. This is
fascinating to think about, because I know that it is relevant of some
of my clothing choices, two in particular that I recall strongly, a
desire to belong and be separate.

Four to five winters ago, I would regularly pass a woman on the morning
commute with a rich wine colored fall/early winter coat, covered in a
large hood. I loved seeing not only the woman, but her coat also. A
winter or so later, I found a wine colored hooded wool coat, different
from hers in its details, length and fit, but nonetheless, inspired by
this woman walking. In my desire to differentiate myself, I had become
part of this woman.

More recently, the same has happened with a fall/spring navy trench
coat. My initial inspiration for the absolute need for such a coat lay
in the British detective mini-series, River, with the actor Stellan
Skarsgård, whom I know from Lars Von Trier films. In this series,
Skarsgård wears the perfect detective coat, it’s knee-length,
waterproof, and black. Mine, however is navy, and I wear it all the time
since the weather has been significantly above freezing. Recently, I
remembered another passerby who inspired this coat, like the woman who
inspired the red coat, this man has worn this coat in every passing
memory I have of him, and I realize that in some little ways, fashion
for me emulates people that intrigue me.

We each have our stories with the world that surrounds us, from our
furniture to our pets, and loved ones. Clothing is a part of that
belonging and opposing, which makes it important to consider. Regardless
of economic niveau, the thoughtful choice is part of everyman’s daily
bout.
