# *Cutting-Edge Fashion: Recent Acquisitions*
#### Through January 3, 2016
### By Ana Sekler

Pioneering fashion is generally not associated with Indianapolis.
Football games and automobile races seem to be more in line with
Indiana’s capital city. So, I was pleasantly surprised to learn that the
Indianapolis Museum of Art was hosting, *Cutting-Edge Fashion* in its
textile gallery during my Midwestern fashion tour.

*Cutting-Edge Fashion* showcased recently acquired garments from
pioneering American, European, and Japanese designers. Although the
exhibit was organized chronologically, beginning with garments from the
1920s through the early 2000s, it was by no means dull or traditional.
As the garments on display were truly avant-garde in their time, and
some would still be considered so today. The chronological set-up was
useful,helping the visitor to view the trajectory of what constituted
cutting-edge in different time periods.

While Claire McCardell’s cotton dress and playsuit, from around 1950,
would not be seen as innovative for today’s time, presented in the
context of this exhibit, the visitor learned that McCardell was one of
the pioneers of the American look.

While Dior was perfecting the hourglass look with the use of corsets and
girdles, American designers like Claire McCardell were creating less
structured silhouettes, although still following the general outline of
Dior’s designs. Her plaid dress for example provided movement and
comfort while the cinched waist still created the desired feminine shape
of the time. Compared with Dior’s red evening dress that stands on the
same platform, McCardell’s garments reflect the casual style that
American women have become known for and designers have perfected
throughout the decades. But it is likely that a modern woman of the 50s
would have worn McCardell in the daytime, strolling in the park, and
Dior’s dress in the evening, dining with her beau.

If McCardell’s unstructured garments were mocking the French structure,
then Rudi Gernreich’s were outright defying any set rules that were
defined by French fashions of the time. Gernreich’s loose-fitting wool
dresses and sexy bathing suits from the mid 1960s set their own criteria
for fashion, challenging the status quo. While Dior had his “New Look”,
Gernreich gave women his “Total Look”, consisting of a knit dress with a
matching stocking, the line from the dress seamlessly flowing into the
line on the stocking, allowing the “dress to be an accessory” as
Gernreich would often say.

Bill Blass’ stunning red evening dress showed the more elegant side of
American fashion. The dress seemed to be made from continuous loops of
the most luxurious thread, creating a clingy red syrup of a dress. Where
McCardell brought mobility, Gernreich innovation, Blass was surely
bringing the sex appeal. While I was photographing the dress, a museum
guard struck up a conversation with me. After I told him of my
Midwestern tour de fashion, he informed me that Bill Blass was not only
from Indiana, but there was an interesting documentary that I should
watch, *The Ghost Army*, about Blass’ time in World War II, which shows
how he worked with other soldiers to create dummy tanks amongst other
creative concoctions to fool the Nazis. Cutting-edge began to become
more than the garments on display, as the personalities behind these
risky fashions exhibited similar qualities in their personal lives.

Works by European and Japanese designers dominated the second room of
the gallery, including works by French designer Jean Charles de
Castelbajac. The two coats on display from the 1990s were whimsical and
vividly colored, reminding me of the de Castelbajac dress I saw at my
school’s fashion resource center, in the same bright orange as the coat
now on display. Orange is a rough color to wear, I’ve made a few
attempts in my life, but have never been fully converted to the orange
side. But this de Castelbajac coat succeeded in opening me up again to
orange. The pockets on it were absolutely ridiculous, and I mean that in
the best way possible. As a huge fan of pockets, I’ve ignored many a
jacket or pant because of improper or lacking pockets. I was overjoyed
to see that this coat had two pockets on each sleeve and two on each
side of the coat. And these weren’t any regular pockets, but almost like
mini-bags. I have several purses the size of these pockets. But if I had
this coat, a purse I would not need. It’s practicality made to the point
of absurdity and that is what makes it risky, and worthy of being in
this exhibit.

There were several Vivienne Westwood garments on display, the Boob-Tube
Sweater being my favorite, again in a shade of orange. Moschino,
McQueen, Galliano, Margiela represented the rest of Europe on three
platforms, while the Japanese Fashion Revolution, as the exhibit panel
named it, had its own lengthy platform, from which to showcase Issey
Miyake, Rei Kawakubo for Comme des Garçons, Junya Watanabe for Comme des
Garçons, and Yohji Yamamoto. Kawakubo’s infamous ‘Bump’ collection was
on view, the bumps interacting with the contours and curves of the body
when worn. Definitely a risky garment for the average woman, who has
enough bumps and curves without added pillows, but it would be an
amusing piece to try on at the very least. Another fun piece from
Kawakubo was a white crop top with matching leggings, with hands sewn on
the hips and breasts. The bunny ears hat was designed by Stephen Jones
and makes the whole thing look like a playboy bunny being fondled.

Wearability is not so much at stake here, but the Japanese spirit of
going beyond proposed fashion limits shines in this selection of
garments. The two-piece dress by Junya Watanabe for Comme des Garçons
was the one of the rare pieces that I wanted to walk out in. It retains
the deconstructed aesthetic of many Japanese designers, with the ragged
hem of the tweed skirt and the waist pierced with large safety pins,
making the skirt feel undone. While the classic navy and white striped
top pays homage to Chanel’s 1917 Breton top in her nautical collection,
it surpasses any direct appropriation as the neckline is knotted and
threaded together with a large set of pearls, rebellious and proper at
once.

Risk is always necessary, in art, in fashion, in life. The work of the
designers in this exhibit is what moved fashion into its next phase,
forced it out of its comfort zone. Fashion designers like Claire
McCardell, Rei Kawakubo, Rudi Gernreich, and Junya Watanabe have been
like fortune-tellers in a way, forecasting where a women’s next step
will be before she even knows it herself, and offering the right outfit
for her chosen path.
